[TITLE MUSIC]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And today I have an
extra-special guest for you.
His name is John Robbins.
And he has impacted
me personally,
and my mom, and our family
in such a unique way.
Early on in our journey, when we
were researching about the best
nutrition, the best way to
eat to help my father get well
and also help save the planet,
we came across a book called
"Diet For a New America."
This book, I gave
to my dad to read,
going through his illness, but
he wasn't really interested
at that time.
But my mom read it.
And mom and I had such
a special connection
over this book, the
stories about animals
and the connection that humans
have to animals, and then
the horrors of factory farming
and the mainstream meat
and dairy production that's
happening these days,
and the many
benefits that we can
get from eliminating too
many man-made, processed
foods in our diet and
returning to a natural diet.
John is a trailblazer
when it comes
to the health of
wellness industry.
And now him and his
son, Ocean Robbins,
have started the Food
Revolution Network.
And together they
are helping light
up more and more people
each and every year.
And as you would
know at Food Matters,
we're huge fans of their work.
And it's a pleasure to be
speaking to John today.
John.
>> James.
>> How you doing?
>> I'm good.
Glad you're here, and we
can have this conversation.
>> Thank you.
So to begin with, I'd
like to know a little bit
about what it was like being
John Robbins as a kid--
as a 6-year-old,
as a 10-year-old,
where did you grow up, and what
was life like at those times?
>> Well as a 6-year-old, I
actually had polio when I was
six, and I was in a wheelchair
when I was six years old.
So you mentioned 6, and that's
the memory that comes back.
The doctor said I would be in a
wheelchair the rest of my life.
But what happened was that I
did spend about a year that way,
but then I started to regain
some feeling in my legs,
and some movement-- more in
the right leg than the left.
And I could kind of get around,
but with a lot of limitation.
When I was 21, they said--
my left leg was three inches
shorter than the right.
I couldn't put any weight on it.
It was very, very gimpy,
and I limped badly.
And the doctors said, well,
your growing years are over now,
you're going to have
to live with this.
And I remember
thinking, when I heard
that, I don't think you know
as much as you think you know,
I'm not accepting
that prognosis.
And I began then
to change my life.
And I walked away from my
dad's company at that point.
Because he had planned
my life for me--
or for him.
And it was a path
paved in rocky road ice
cream and a lot of money.
Because my dad and my uncle
had founded Baskin-Robbins
31 flavors, which became, in my
childhood, the world's largest
ice cream company.
It was a multibillion
dollar company,
and my dad and uncle owned it.
And I'm an only son, so my dad
had groomed me to succeed him
that was his plan.
And my dad was used to
getting what he wanted.
He was a doer.
He knew how to manifest
stuff, and he did.
He built this ice cream empire.
My uncle, his business partner,
my dad's brother-in-law,
died of a heart attack
at the age of 54.
He was a very big guy.
He ate a lot of ice cream.
And when he died,
I asked my dad,
do you think there could be a
connection between the amount
of ice cream that Burt Baskin
ate and his fatal heart attack?
And my dad said, no, his
ticker just got tired
and stopped working.
And then he looked at
me in a certain way.
And if I could
translate that look,
it said, don't ever
mention that again.
And there was a psychologist--
a famous psychologist named
John Bradshaw who
spoke about families
that have a "no talk" rule
about certain taboo topics.
Maybe it's dad's drinking, maybe
it's something that they just
can't talk about.
It was too painful to, and
so they don't go there.
And they learn to suppress that.
Well, in my family
of origin, it was
that there might be a connection
between ice cream and disease,
or heart disease in
particular, because that's
what killed my uncle.
But I thought, OK, I
understand why my dad doesn't
want to talk about that.
By that time, he had sold--
he had manufactured
more ice cream
than anybody who had ever
lived on this planet.
He didn't want to think
that the product was killing
anybody or hurting anybody.
But I suspected it might not be
the best thing for our health
to eat ice cream or
eat a lot of ice cream.
And if you're in
the business, you
want people to eat a lot of it.
That's the business model.
And he had groomed
me to succeed him.
I'd invented flavors.
I invented one called
Jamocha Almond Fudge.
It became a huge flavor.
>> What was that called again?
>> Jamocha almond fudge.
It's a coffee ice cream with
a chocolate ribbon in it
and bits of almonds.
But it became very popular.
And I loved inventing flavors.
I loved eating ice cream.
What kid doesn't?
And we had unlimited amounts.
We had an ice-cream-cone-shaped
swimming pool in our backyard.
I swam in it.
I had ice cream for
breakfast sometimes.
And I wasn't well.
I had had the polio, I
was ill, I was frail.
I was not emotionally
well, not physically well.
And I looked around,
most members of my family
were very heavy, and
I started to think
that my uncle's death and
some other things that I saw--
I was starting to
think, I don't think
I want to do what my
dad has planned for me,
even though I was
enjoying working with him
and the company was
a extravagant success
and there was really unlimited
amounts of ice cream,
and almost unlimited amounts
of money, actually, coming in.
But I made a
decision then, and it
was a decision that defined
my life ever since, which
was to walk away
from Baskin-Robbins
and the opportunity to run
the company with my dad,
and eventually to inherit it.
And I also chose,
out of integrity,
to walk away from the money.
So I told my dad,
because I'm not
going to do what
you want me to do,
what you've planned
for me to do,
I think it's honorable and
respectful to you and to me
to not have any access to
your money, which has come
from the ice cream company.
So I lived very simply
after that with my wife.
We've been married
for 51 years now.
And she was part of
that decision with me.
And I walked away from
the company, the money,
and led a very
different life, and came
to really look into is there
a connection between ice cream
and heart disease, what is
the real health consequences
of the standard American diet?
I was kind of born into the
great American food machine.
I was born with
a front row seat.
And I had opportunities
that most people don't have,
including the opportunity to
see what that kind of wealth--
most of us really
aspire for that.
We want that.
We think, if we had that,
our lives would be marvelous.
And yes, wealth
gives you options.
But whether you can take
advantage of those options
in a way that's
spiritually fulfilling,
that's of service to
life, to yourself,
to others depends on
your consciousness,
and your integrity, and your
ethics, and your values.
And we live in a society that
values the materialism too
much.
It hurts all of us,
including the wealthy.
And I lived among them, and
I was one of them growing up,
and I chose to walk
away from that,
not because I'm a fan of
poverty for a second--
I am not-- but
because some people,
they're so poor all
they have is money,
and there's an emptiness inside,
and their souls are broken.
And even though they
have all the power that
comes with great
wealth, they don't
know how to use it in a
way that uplifts anybody.
They don't know how
to use it to create
more beauty in the world, to
create more love in the world,
to create more opportunities
for people in the world.
They don't know how to do that.
So they end up buying
$50 million Ferraris
or whatever, or possibly
even worse, they
use it to purchase political
power that they then
use to further build their
fortunes at the expense
of the common good.
And that is a tragedy
of our times, I think.
So I didn't want to be
a part of that at all,
and I haven't been.
>> What was it--
thank you so much.
It's been a beautiful
share about the story,
and that's perfect.
What was it like--
because I can relate in
a very different way.
My father was an accountant,
and he was not home,
he was never there at school
meetings with the parents
and children, and he was
building his business,
building his wealth.
And that's the one thing
he had control over
and he knew how to do.
But it was at the cost
of the relationship
with my myself and my brother.
My dad was not present.
And there was a very
emotional detachment
throughout most
of our upbringing.
You talk about how your father
was building this machine.
What was it like
emotionally in your house,
or the relationship you
had with your father?
>> Well, my dad was all about
building Baskin-Robbins.
He worked 80 hours
a week doing it.
And so I didn't really have
a relationship with him
much other than
through the business.
But I started working
at Baskin-Robbins
when I was 5 years old.
I mean, all I did then
was sweep the floor
or empty the waste baskets.
But he wanted me to learn the
business from the inside out.
So as I got older, he would
give me age-appropriate jobs.
And I worked in
the factory where
ice cream was manufactured.
I worked in franchising
where the stores
were located and sold.
I worked in advertising
and marketing.
I worked in all the
departments of the business--
sourcing the ingredients,
developing flavors.
And that was my
relationship to my dad,
was we would drive
together-- he would drive,
because I was a kid--
to the office together,
and then we'd drive home.
We'd talk about the business.
That was my
relationship to my dad.
I hardly knew him
other than that.
Because that's what
his life was all about.
And that's what
he wanted with me.
He didn't have much interest
in anything about my feelings
or thoughts other
than what did I
think about the next
flavor or something
to do with the company.
And I actually liked it.
I was rather thrilled.
He was really good
at what he did.
He was really focused.
His ability to concentrate
was amazing, kind of yogic
in a way, although it
didn't have the values
of caring for others.
Although he wanted
to make people happy,
and he thought ice cream did.
And in fact, one
year, we came out
with an advertising slogan
that was the centerpiece
of all the ads that year.
And it was "we
make people happy."
He loved the slogan.
And I remember saying
to him, I don't like it,
because we don't
make people happy.
Human happiness is
an existential issue.
It arises out of how we
treat each other, the quality
of our lives, of
our relationships,
of our work and service.
And he was like, you're
being a philosopher.
This is an advertising slogan.
And I said, well,
but it's not true.
We provide a product that
provides momentary pleasure.
And people can celebrate
that, but momentary pleasure
and human happiness
are different things.
To me, that was an existential
reality of significance.
To him, that was an annoyance
that I was talking that way.
So we didn't always see
eye to eye on things.
And in time, I began to
realize that's because we
have different values.
And as my own values
began to emerge
in my teen years and late teen
years, I began to realize--
I was a product of the '60s.
I had the opportunity to work
with Dr. Martin Luther King.
I marched with him.
I went to Alabama and
Mississippi to be with him
and participate in the
Civil Rights movement.
I was a kid from the
north, I was a white kid,
but to me that was
history happening.
To me, that was an opportunity
to be part of something,
to witness something that
was of immense significance.
To me, the racism in our
society was abhorrent.
My dad thought, you're
trying to rock the boat,
they have their own
culture in the south,
you shouldn't go down there,
you should leave them alone,
they don't want you.
And we didn't see eye
to eye on that either.
And then there was
the war in Vietnam.
And I thought it was a
ridiculously stupid idea,
the war, and cruel, and
a waste of resources,
and terribly, terribly
damaging to our soldiers
but to the people of
Vietnam most significantly.
Everybody involved got hurt.
And I opposed the war.
I protested it.
My dad was in favor of it.
So we had our
differences in values.
And I began to
understand that for me
to, even though I loved my dad
and respected his achievements
tremendously, for me to
follow in his footsteps, which
is what he wanted, I would
have lost my integrity.
I would have lost
my soul in some way.
That's not what I'm
here on this earth
to do, invent a 32nd flavor.
And he was saying, well,
you could take stores
throughout the
world, and you could
build the company even bigger.
And I was thinking,
yeah, so what?
Why would I-- yes, I could.
You know, you've built
something powerful, big, strong.
I could continue that.
But there was something in
my heart that just said,
that would be lucrative, that
path is paved with gold and ice
cream, the other path is really
confusing, awkward, strange.
I don't know where it will lead.
I just have to put one
foot in front of the other,
and take it a day
at a time, and see
what unfolds, and try to get
into alignment with my spirit,
with my wholeness, with the
greater good of our world,
with the fact that
we are inextricably
interwoven with the
whole earth community.
And I really felt
called, honestly,
to live a very different
life than the one he
had planned for me.
And it was so painful, because
how do you say no to something
like that?
My dad thought I was
crazy to walk away
from that kind of money
into a life of insecurity.
But the truth is,
for me, when I walked
away from the
financial security,
I became more emotionally
secure, ironically,
because I now was
listening to and trying
to abide by and express
the gifts within me,
and the understandings and
love in my heart for life,
as opposed to just
seeking the dollar.
Our society teaches us that
that's what success is.
When we say somebody is
a success, usually what
we mean by that term is that
they've made a lot of money
or they have a lot of money.
That's a success.
I think that's a very
impoverished view of success.
I think a successful
human being-- well,
we probably all have to
define that for ourselves.
But for me, anyway, I
define success for myself
as living in harmony
with my spirit
and the spirit of others,
living with respect for myself
and others, living with
respect for creation,
for this beautiful, endangered,
fragile, crazy world, and messy
world, but loving it anyway.
And to me, that's
where I find my heart.
>> Very beautiful.
I'd like if we could spend a
short moment, John, closing
the loop on this story before
we get into some of the details
just on the meat
and dairy industry,
because we could
maybe finish there.
Because you touched on
some beautiful points
around fulfillment, and
happiness, and success
there, which I had
planned as well.
So in short, if we
could go through this,
you moved to Vancouver
Island, you went off the grid,
you did some research,
you uncovered
that the processed food industry
was causing a lot of harm.
And then, in the
craziest way possible,
your dad found the book--
>> Yes.
>> --and got well.
I'd love to take
close that loop.
>> Yeah, so after I left, my
wife and I moved to a little
island off the coast
of British Columbia,
built a one-room log cabin.
It's all we could afford.
I did most of the work.
And we lived there for 10
years, and we grew our own food.
We were novices.
We made a lot of mistakes.
It was rugged.
But we were trying to
weave ourselves back
into the web of life,
and send our roots down
into the natural world.
I had grown up in what I
maybe flippantly called
an air-conditioned nightmare.
In my family of origin, roughing
it meant room service was late.
But now we were
really roughing it.
We were living
very, very simply.
And it was beautiful
and it was tough.
And I eventually wrote
"Diet for a New America,"
the book you mentioned.
It was my first book.
And I sent it to my dad.
By that time, we weren't
talking too much.
There was a lot of distance.
I had made my
decision, my choice.
And he was hurt.
I tried to do it with
as much respect for him
as I possibly could.
But in essence, I was
rejecting his life work,
and that was a sad thing,
and he was angry about it.
So we let each other be mostly,
and didn't talk too much.
But I thought he
might want to know
that I had published a book.
And so I sent him a copy.
He didn't open it.
My dad, at that time,
had become very ill.
He had diabetes.
He had very high blood pressure.
He had heart disease.
He was overweight.
His diabetes was so
severe that the prognosis
was but possible amputation
of a foot or even a leg,
and blindness.
And his blood pressure
was so out of control
he had to take 10 what he
called "horse pills" every day.
I don't know what they were.
But he'd been told that
he'd have to take them
for the rest of his life.
And one day, he went
to his cardiologist,
and this was shortly after my
first book had been published,
maybe six months after.
And it had been reviewed
in the "American Journal
of Cardiology" very favorably.
And my dad went to
his cardiologist,
and the cardiologist leveled
with him and said, Mr. Robbins,
you're a very sick man now.
And the best we
can do for you is
try to juggle your
medications, try
to control some of
the side effects
that you're experiencing and
that are distressing you,
and try to make your few
remaining years a little more
comfortable.
And my dad was scared.
And then he said,
on the other hand,
if you were willing to
change your lifestyle
and what you eat, there might be
a different prognosis for you.
And my dad said, well,
what do you mean?
And the physician
handed him a copy
of "Diet for a New
America," my book,
not knowing that the John
Robbins who had written it
was the son of his patient, Irv
Robbins, the founder and owner
of Baskin-Robbins.
He of course knew who my dad
was and what his profession was,
but it's a common last
name, and he didn't know.
And my dad of course
knew, because I'd sent him
already a copy of the book.
But he didn't tell him.
But he went home, and
now, because the book
had been blessed by the high
priest of Western medicine,
he began to read it.
I'm sure you read the
copy the doctor gave him,
not the copy I'd sent
him that was autographed.
But he read it, and he started
to make changes, small ones
at first.
But he got results.
And then he made more changes,
more results, more changes,
more results.
Fast-forward two
years, he's off all
the medications he'd been on.
His diabetes has gone
into complete remission.
He doesn't need insulin anymore.
He doesn't even need
diabetic pills anymore.
His circulation to his
legs and feet is restored
and to his eyes is restored.
He's lost the weight
that he needed to lose.
His golf game has
improved by eight strokes.
And he's thrilled, and
the doctor's thrilled,
and he calls me up and
says, Johnny, you're
not going to believe
what's happened.
And I said, OK, what's happened?
He said, it's unbelievable.
I said, all right,
what's unbelievable?
It's really not possible,
but it's happened.
What, dad?
Well, it turns out
you were right.
And honestly, that my
dad who had achieved
this phenomenal
business success could
say to the son that rejected
his life work that he
might have been
right about anything,
I respect that enormously.
Because that's of the
heart, that takes something.
This is a man who had it all.
He was a billionaire.
And yet he could say to his
son who walked away from it all
that he might have been right.
I mean, to me, I'll
always live with that joy.
And then after that we
had a rapprochement.
We began to talk
about a lot of things,
there was a
reconciliation between us,
and our relationship
was completely renewed.
Now, there were still some
things we disagreed about,
like politics.
But the connection was
there, the love was there,
the respect was there, both
ways, reciprocal, moving.
And we were connected again.
And he lived another
20 years, most of them
very healthy ones, when
the prognosis had been he
was on his deathbed.
So I love that I-- you
know, I disappointed him
so much by making a choice that
I thought was for integrity,
but from his point of view,
it was a slap in the face,
and that in the end I was able
to give him something perhaps
more valuable than had
I done the obvious thing
and had invented a 32nd flavor.
Because then he would have died
20 years earlier than he did,
and we would never have had that
kind of connection that we had.
Because I could relate to him
from my being, from my truth.
I wasn't placating him,
I wasn't accommodating,
I wasn't just playing
into what he expected.
I was myself, and
he was himself.
We had different paths in
life, and we loved each other.
And he'd given me life.
He gave me a great start.
I was able to give
him something that I
think was more meaningful
and important than--
I mean, he didn't need
help building his business.
He did that very
well on his own.
So I love that I was able to
make that connection with him
and help him regain his health.
And since then, I've
written other books,
and sold millions
of copies of them,
and had many, many people
write me and tell me
that their lives had been
changed in similar ways
to my dad's, or relatives of
theirs had, as your dad was.
And that is so much more
rewarding and fulfilling for me
than had I been a billionaire.
I think we really need to define
redefine success in a way that
includes our hearts,
and includes our love,
and includes our compassion,
and includes our caring for one
another.
And it's so it's not just about
a dog-eat-dog kind of thing.
You know, dogs don't
even eat dogs, in truth.
But I think we know when
we're a success when
our hearts are strong and
we live with them in a way.
And so our life
reflects our hearts.
We make choices that express
our love, our caring, and that
that becomes the defining
aspect of who we are.
>> Beautiful, very beautiful.
Can I speak now to
a little bit more
of the details of how, in
particular, meat has changed.
Because one of the parts of
the film, a common dialogue,
is that for this huge
part of our evolution,
we've eaten fruits, vegetables,
nuts, seeds, tubers, et cetera,
and animal products, and liver,
and all these crazy things.
And I think there is an
element of truth to that.
And so people use that, and
they go and they consume meat.
We've been understandably
consuming more meat and dairy
than we have had
in recent history.
That's one problem which we
can potentially speak to.
But the main thing I'd
like you to answer on
is about how meat is changed.
Before we do that,
just for one second,
could you just say once
more, "and I wrote the book,
'Diet for new America,'" because
you quickly said, after that,
"as you mentioned."
We might not be able to cut that
out, because it's very tight.
So could you say, once
more, "and I wrote the book,
'Diet for a new America.'"
>> And I wrote the book,
"Diet for a New America."
>> Thank you.
I'm glad I remembered that.
Sorry.
So yeah, meat has changed.
So what used to be wild,
or this, or we'd hunt,
and we'd get from rivers.
>> Yeah.
Meat has changed enormously,
and people don't realize this.
The industry doesn't
want you to know.
They actually have passed
legislation in various states
in the United States--
they're called ag gag bills--
that prohibit taking
videos, taking cameras
into these factory farms and
revealing what's going on.
I think the public
has a right to know
how their food is produced.
But the people who are producing
it in a certain kind of way
don't want the public to know.
Because they realize
that if the public saw it
there'd be outrage.
And what I'm talking about is
modern meat, industrial meat.
And it's produced in
factory farms and feedlots.
We have images in our minds
of beef cattle or dairy cows
grazing out in pasture land.
But that's not
what's done anymore.
There's some of that,
but it's a sliver.
It's 1%, if that, of meat
production, of dairy production
now.
And the animals are confined.
They're not allowed
to move in many cases.
That the thinking behind that
is movement burns energy,
burns calories.
And they want every
calorie of input, of feed,
to go into producing
more meat to be sold.
They don't want any of it
wasted with the animal moving.
So they confine them.
They don't let them move.
That way they get fatter, like
people do if they're sedentary,
don't ever move.
You get fatter.
And they feed them diets that
are completely unnatural.
I have been in cattle
operations where
they feed them cement dust
mixed into their feed.
It's ridiculous.
And it's not healthy
for the animals at all.
They get sick, as
you would expect.
And the animals are sick.
They're obese, they're
sick, they're miserable.
But they're killed pretty young.
They get fat pretty quick.
That's the whole idea behind it.
And so their illness doesn't
cost the producers money.
Yeah, some die, but the
business model still works.
It works measured in dollars and
cents, which is how they think,
but the price that the
animals pay is enormous.
You don't have to
be a vegetarian,
you don't have to be an
animal rights activist, you
don't have to belong to PETA to,
if you see it, to be appalled.
Because most of us
want the animals--
if we're going to eat meat,
we want those animals to be
treated well--
decently, anyway--
to be slaughter humanely, to
live a life that's natural,
and to be fed food that
is not going to make
them intentionally obese.
Because what does that do to us?
It's hard to measure misery in
a test tube, or quantify it.
But if people see how
modern meat is produced
and how our modern dairy
products are produced,
there's something that
goes on in most of us,
it's just we're disgusted by it.
If you look at our past,
we were hunter-gatherers,
or gatherer-hunters,
depending on the ecosystem
that our ancestors lived in.
And we ate what the
environment provided.
If we lived near a
lake, we ate fish.
If we lived near the ocean,
we were probably fishermen.
If we lived in the tropics,
we ate what was growing there.
If we lived in the
far north, we hunted.
But we ate seeds, we ate
insects, we ate nuts,
we ate plants, mostly.
We had a very high-fibrous diet.
Because the original plants
were much more high in fiber
than plants are today.
And the animal products we eat
were mostly insects, and grubs,
and things like that.
But if we were able to catch
or kill a larger animal,
those were wild animals.
And they were very
low in fat, and they
were particularly
low in the storage
fats, the saturated fats that
we know are dangerous to us.
And their muscle
tissue was real.
I mean, they moved.
That's how they survived,
that's how they lived.
Today, though, modern meat
animals are living in feedlots,
are living in factory farms.
They are not allowed to move.
They don't develop
muscle tissue.
They're very high in fat,
and it's mostly storage fats,
highly saturated fats.
And also, in order to keep
these animals alive under these
conditions-- these
conditions are so unnatural,
the animals are so miserable,
that they have to inject them
with antibiotics or
feed them antibiotics,
and oftentimes use hormones
as well and other chemicals--
pesticides to kill
the flies that
are around, and insecticides.
And so the meat
absorbs these poisons.
And then modern meat,
it's full of these things
that our historical meat
didn't have, including misery.
I mean, I don't know
how you quantify misery.
But anyone who sees how these
animals live in industrial meat
production dairy production
knows that they're miserable.
And I don't want
misery on my menu.
And I think there is something
about that misery that
gets passed on.
And also, they're
fed obesogenic diets,
because the industry
wants them to gain weight
as rapidly as possible, with
the least amount of food input.
So they want the "weight
gain to food input"
ratio to be as high as possible.
The diet is designed for
that, and the animals
have been bred for that.
Well, if we eat animals
that have been bred for that
and that have been fed a
diet designed for that,
is it any wonder,
then, that obesity
is rampant in our culture?
I think this contributes to it.
And when people say, oh,
but our ancestors ate meat,
and then they go
down to the butcher
or to McDonald's
and buy that, they
don't realize how different--
metabolically, nutritionally,
energetically--
that meat that they're
buying is from the meat
they're talking about our
ancestors having eaten.
Because what our ancestors
ate were wild animals.
The closest thing would be game.
And when people hunt deer--
I'm not a hunter myself,
I don't believe in it--
but I will tell you this, I will
respect someone who is a hunter
and kills a deer, particularly
if they do it cleanly, and eats
everything from that animal.
Because we're going
to McDonald's.
And we've normalized that,
we don't think about it.
But there is an
animal behind that,
and that animal lived
a life of torture,
not the free life of the deer.
So to me, the hunter
is actually more
ethical than the average
everyday consumer who's
unconscious of the fact that the
flesh, the meat they're eating,
came from an animal
whose life was
a disgrace to the
human-animal bond,
and that contains
substances like hormones,
like antibiotic
residues, and sometimes
antibiotic-resistant bacteria
that then undermine our health.
And the difference in the
health implications and health
consequences of modern meat and
dairy products compared to what
our ancestors ate is enormous.
And it's painful to see.
And I respect those
who want to eat meat
and are doing their best
to get grass-fed and truly
pasture-raised animals.
Although even then,
they're breeds that
have been bred for
maximum weight gain.
So I don't eat modern
meat at all, ever,
and I haven't in over 50 years.
And I'm 71, and I'm doing OK.
>> Perfect.
And I think there's also
something to be said--
we don't have to go
down this route--
around the fact that we
domesticated these animals,
and we're eating
domesticated animals.
It's like this-- we're becoming
domesticated as a species
as well.
I mean, from a nature-based
philosophy perspective.
>> Yes.
The animals that we're
eating, and whose milk we're
eating, as cheese, or yogurt,
or as milk, or ice cream
have been domesticated.
Their entire lives
are controlled
by an external
force, human beings,
who has very little interest
in their well-being,
or welfare, or
certainly happiness.
And they're subjugated.
They're imprisoned creatures.
And if we want our
spirits to be free,
if we want to be lit
from within ourselves
by our own life
force, I don't think
it's helpful to
depend for our fuel
on the flesh of animals whose
lives have been imprisoned,
whose lives have been
tortured, whose lives have been
subjugated, whose life
force is so squashed, so
subordinated-- how they're
bred, how they're treated,
what they're fed.
I think the difference
between eating a wild animal
and eating an animal that's
been bred and domesticated
and imprisoned is night and day.
>> So let's talk about--
one of the things I really found
fascinating about your message
is how it's evolved
over the years.
And I saw you speak at the
Longevity Now conference about
two or three years ago,
maybe-- maybe four years ago--
and you made a comment about
how we're better off trying
to make 80% of the
population eat more plants
than 10% become vegan.
And I don' specifically
want to touch on that,
but I do have a question
around, what are we to eat?
In your opinion, if
somebody doesn't want
to be vegan, for instance,
if they don't have--
and I can understand
ethical reasons to be vegan,
and I respect that deeply.
If someone doesn't want to be,
and they're just a lay person,
and like, well, this
makes sense, this story,
what do I eat then?
So let's talk about what is the
most natural diet of a human.
Lots of plants, maybe you
could detail that a little bit,
but also specifically if there
are some animal products--
I know that you say, sometimes
wild fish or a few things
like this--
what would fit into the
framework based on your work?
And if you wanted to reference
Healthy at 100, that would be,
also, a great segue.
>> If someone wants to eat
animal products as part
of their diet, the most ethical
and the healthiest is wild
fish, particularly fish
that is low-mercury,
that is high in
omega-3 fatty acids--
wild salmon, sardines,
herring, mackerel.
These are fish that are
low in heavy metals,
low in contaminants, low
in pesticide residues,
and are high in
the types of fats
that our bodies need to thrive
and our brains need to thrive.
So that's the best.
And when you're
eating a wild fish,
you're eating a wild animal.
You're eating an animal--
it may be living
in polluted waters.
Unfortunately we have treated
the oceans and rivers and lakes
like garbage dumps.
And so the waters of the world
are contaminated to an extent.
But there are fish that pick
up more of that and fish
that pick up less than that.
And the fish I
mentioned are the ones
who pick up the least of it.
So for example,
wild Alaskan salmon
is one of the lowest fish in
mercury that you could find.
Most forms of tuna, on the other
hand, are very high in mercury.
And that's a big issue.
If you're going to
eat fish, you don't
want to take mercury
into your system.
What you want to eat,
though, is as many plants
as possible, as many fruits, and
vegetables, and seeds, and nuts
as you can.
Some people do well with
whole grains, others don't.
You have to listen to your
body on all of these things.
Some people want to be vegans
and eat no animal products.
Some people want to eat
some animal products.
There's lots of variation
here on what's a healthy diet.
But a healthy diet does not
include the processed junk
foods that people eat today.
We've normalized that.
It's everywhere.
But that doesn't make
it healthy and that
doesn't make it good for us.
I grew up eating Sugar
Frosted Flakes for breakfast.
I know what that does.
And I would never
feed that to my kids
or want to see it fed to
kids, or adults either.
I don't eat any
factory-farmed products ever,
and I haven't for over
50 years, because I'm
a conscientious objector to
that way of treating animals.
It's so cruel.
And it produces
products that are
harmful to us, that are so
different from the meats
that our ancestors
grew up eating.
There's paleo
diets, where people
want to eat as our ancestors
in pre-agricultural times did.
They didn't domesticate animals.
They didn't drink
the milk of an animal
because they didn't control
the lives of animals.
When we eat modern meats
and dairy products--
and eggs for that matter--
we're consuming and we're
contributing our money
to a system that has enormous
environmental implications--
greenhouse gas emissions, water
pollution, soil degradation,
so many, many serious
consequences to the ecosystems.
And we're eating products that
are damaging to our bodies,
to our metabolism, to
our glucose regulation,
to our hormonal balance, to
our cardiovascular health,
to our respiratory health,
to our mental health.
And we're also eating
products that are really
cruel to the animals involved.
And if we want to be healthy--
I think it's a marvelous thing
that the food choices that are
healthiest for us personally,
that give us the most strength,
the most vitality, the strongest
immune systems and therefore
the least susceptibility
to pathogens and infectious
diseases, the strongest
respiratory system so we can
breathe deeply with life, and
enjoy the beauty of simply
breathing clean air--
hopefully we have clean air--
and maybe then we're more
protective of our air,
and more aware of it,
less likely to smoke,
less likely to allow
polluters to prevail--
the same food choices
that are so much healthier
for us are also
kinder to the animals,
don't involve treating animals
with egregious cruelty,
and don't cause the
environmental distress
and damage that modern
meat production is
so good at producing.
So to me, that is a
win-win-win across the board.
I take it as a sign that this
is what we're meant to eat,
this is how we're meant to
live so that we can thrive
and others can thrive,
so that we can thrive
and we don't destroy the
world in the process.
We don't have to
conquer the world,
and turn resources into
revenue, and exploit and damage
everything in order to prevail
over life, we can't just
be with life, and be with
ourselves in a way where
we risk we respect life,
and we live with reverence
for the life force,
in us and in others,
and we then protect the forests
instead of just see them
as board feet to be sold,
and we protect the lifeforms
that are part of the
biodiversity of the planet
and part of the inextricably
interwoveness of our world.
We protect it.
And we protect it
cause we love it,
and because it loves us back.
It feeds us.
It's our source.
And then we don't want
to pollute the oceans
and fill them with plastic.
Then we don't want to fill
our skies with toxic gases.
Than we don't want to fill
the atmosphere with gases that
are destabilizing our planet.
Then we want to
live with respect
for ourselves and others
because it feels so good.
>> Wow, Joe, this
is so profound.
Honestly, I've interviewed
people since 2007,
and this is by far one
of the best, for sure.
You've crafted your message
for a number of years.
>> The world's
longest-lived cultures,
the healthiest
and longest-lived,
where there are the
most centenarians,
people that live to 100,
and super-centenarians,
people that live to
110, have been studied,
and we know who they are,
we know what they do.
And they vary a little bit.
They're all vegan-ish.
None of them are purely
vegan, but they all
eat a lot of plants.
And none of them eat very
many animal products.
And none of them
eat any modern meat.
And none of them eat
any processed foods
or packaged foods that we
see in our supermarkets that
are full of sugar, and
chemicals, and processing.
And they also care
for each other.
They live in a way where their
relationships with one another
are their wealth.
We think of wealth as what we
acquire, the things we own.
They think of wealth as who
they love and who loves them.
They think of wealth as their
character, their reputation
in their communities.
And they care for what they
experience as their wealth.
They care for each other.
They care for themselves,
and their characters,
and the kind of
people they become.
And they help others to
become the kind of people
that they want in
their society--
honest people, hardworking
people, reliable people,
people of integrity, and
thoughtfulness, and depth,
and creativity.
And they value the
person who can sing,
they value the person who
can make beautiful things,
they value the person
who nurtures others,
they value the people who
contribute to the well-being
of their communities.
And if somebody amasses
personal stuff--
what we would call wealth--
at the expense of others,
they don't value that.
They see that that
ruptures the connectivity,
the connective tissue
of the culture.
And so they look
askance on that,
and they may even find
that to be shameful.
We, on the other hand,
will celebrate lifestyles
of the rich and famous.
I find that a little crazy.
Because we have decided that
what makes a person rich
is something that I view
as something that harms,
in many cases.
Now, the person who
is rich in money
and uses that money to help
others be well and help others
live happy and joyful lives, and
safe lives, and secure lives,
that I honor immensely.
We need more of that.
But all too often our
rich people don't do that.
And the cost to
their souls is great,
and the cost to our society
is possibly even greater.
>> Fabulous, amazing.
You've said this so many times--
we've really got it backwards.
And I would like if
we could finish here
on how important it's
been for you, and maybe,
in a sense of encouragement for
others, to move from their head
to their heart.
And how if we follow
our heart, we're
able to connect more deeply
with our spirit and our essence,
and potentially
uncover our gift--
what are we here
to give, how can we
turn our attention
from me, me, me to we?
And if we can do that,
we can change our lives.
Because there will be a lot
of people in their 30s and 40s
watching this who have spent
the first half of their life
chasing money, fame, wealth,
notoriety, the big house,
the kids in the private schools.
And they're unhappy,
and they're sick,
and they need to
change direction,
and maybe they just need
to go and help build
a school in a foreign country--
maybe not that.
But in your final
sort of message
here, John, in your
entire life experience,
you made a distinction to move
from your head to your heart.
How important do
you think that is
in terms of finding at least
happiness and peace in one's
self, but also in terms
of how important that
is for the world at this
stage, and if we all
do that collectively,
how we could potentially
reverse this mess we've
gotten ourselves into.
>> Well I think we all know the
world is in tremendous crisis
and peril today.
And I think the way
we've defined success
is part of that problem.
Because we are, as individuals,
rather than thinking
about what gifts do we have
to develop, to cultivate,
to grow inside ourselves,
and then to give,
we're thinking about what we
can acquire, what we can take,
rather than thinking about
what we have to give.
And to be in reciprocity with
life, we give and receive.
And in order to
give and receive,
you need to live with respect
for yourself and for the world,
and for everyone else in it.
And when we have
billionaires and lead
the world in homelessness as
well, that, to me, is a shame.
That, to me, is
an embarrassment.
That, to me, is a
tremendous mistake
that we've made in how
we define ourselves.
And if we can learn again
where our hearts are,
find them, and let them teach
us, and show us, and guide us,
and live according to what
is in our hearts and souls
that we have come to this earth
to share, to give, to be known
for, instead of just the
fame for its own sake,
then we are playing
the part we are here
to play in the healing.
And each of us
has a part to play
in the healing that's needed.
And yes, you and I are each
one 7 billionth of humanity.
And you can think
of it that way.
That's just a tiny,
tiny drop in the bucket.
But if there's enough drops,
it ceases to be a bucket.
It becomes the tide
of history-turning.
It becomes something
that is unstoppable.
It becomes something that
is good, and wholesome,
and beautiful, and
powerful beyond measure.
And that is the
power that Gandhi
called satyagraha, the
power of love force,
caring, the power of Spirit.
And it is greater, when
we create it together,
than the power of materialism,
and the power of the ego,
and the power of separation.
And I think it's up to each
of us to find our calling,
to find our spirit, find our
integrity, and to live it.
And when we do, we're playing
the part in the greater healing
that we're meant to play.
>> John Robbins, you're a
gentleman, you're a scholar,
and you're here as
a force for good.
And it's been a pleasure
speaking with you today.
Thank you so much.
>> Thank you, James.
[TITLE MUSIC]